All right, so in the last few
videos, we've learned firstly that
the abstract and final modifiers are
polar opposites and cannot be used
in the same declaration of a class.
We found that we can instantiate
an object of a final class.
We also found we cannot
subclass a final class.
A final class used in the
extends clause of a class
declaration is a compiler error.
We found that any class can
have a final method, including a
final class, which is redundant
but ok and an abstract class.
A final method will always have
a body that is, it cannot be
abstract for the same reason as a
class - the modifiers are opposites.
And finally, we found that adding
the final modifier to an overridden
method is valid, and still meets the
requirements for the implementation of
a class extending an abstract class.
Now, before we talk about why you
might want to create a final class,
let's make one more change to the
code we've been just exploring.
Swing back over to the editor now.
We're going to add a constructor.
We're going to add it to
our ExtendMeOptional class,
this one up here on line 10.
So, I'm going to paste that in.
So you can see what I've
done there, I've added a
private no-args constructor.
So by doing that, I've
introduced a couple of errors.
You probably can see in the
gutter over the right-hand side,
there's two red indicators there.
If I click on that, first error
you can see is on line 50.
But also, there's an error
down here on line 75.
In both cases, you can see the error
there, there's no default constructor
available in ExtendMeOptional.
So, creating a single private
constructor as we've done up here
on line 12 has basically the same
effect as declaring a class final.
You cannot then use the class in any
extends clause of a class declaration,
but in addition, it prevents the class
from being instantiated and obviously,
those two errors showed us that.
There it is being extended.
There we are trying to instantiate
it, both getting errors.
So note that java.util.Arrays, that class
is a perfect example of a class
that cannot be
instantiated or subclassed.
Although java.util.Arrays is
not declared a final class,
you actually cannot subclass it.
All right, so let's undo that change.
Specifically, I'm just going to
remove the private constructor again.
And obviously, if I rebuild this.
Or remove it perhaps, I
will just do that again.
And obviously, this code will
now work, it will work because
we've actually made those changes.
All right, so remove the
errors in other words.
All right, so our code is now
compiling and executing again.
Now, we could also have
added the private constructor
to our final class.
This one down here on line 28,
preventing an instance of it from
being created if that was our goal.
But what are some of the reasons to
use the final modifier on a class?
Well, firstly, to create an
immutable class to support the
creation of immutable objects.
An immutable class allows an
object to be created with data
through a defined constructor,
but disallows changes after the
initial construction of the object.
Secondly, another reason to use
the final modifier is to prevent
accessibility by protecting
standard and unchangeable
methods or calculations from
being overridden or overloaded.
And the third reason to use a
final modifier is to implement
the Singleton Design Pattern.
If you have a class that has constants
and methods that are not changeable
and extending the method is really not
desirable, then make the class final.
All right, so at this point, I've
shown you why using the final
modifier at both the class and
method level would be good practice.
In the next video, we'll review
nested classes which permit
additional class modifiers as I
described in an earlier slide earlier
in this section of the course.
See you in that next video.